Welcome to this section of the course.
Here I will teach you some methods for identifying organizing principles in a complex system that are
based on small collections of dimensions, or neurons.
This is one level higher than looking at individual neurons or output dimensions, but it's also a bit
more targeted and focused compared to looking at an entire layer or an entire embeddings.
Vector.
Circuit based analyses are really interesting and insightful, but they're also very tricky, both conceptually
and methodologically.
Conceptually, it's not even really clear what exactly a circuit is or should look like.
It's also possible that circuits in complex systems, like language models, are so complex and dynamic
that the circuit architecture itself changes in different contexts and also methodologically.
Statistically, it's quite difficult to identify circuits because, again, the activations are so dynamic
and context dependent.
Later in this section, I will also introduce you to the idea of latent constructs or components, which
is both conceptually and methodologically also pretty tricky.
So basically this section is state of the art.
It's one of the more difficult areas of mechanistic interpretability, but I'm still going to try to
make it an enjoyable and insightful learning experience, and I think you're going to enjoy it.
I will start here by introducing some of the conceptual difficulties of circuit analyses.
Basically, the problem is that we don't really have a set definition of what a circuit means in systems
where the circuits emerge on their own, either through biological or through statistical means.
For example, and this is actually a counter example, this diagram depicts an electronic circuit.
Now in this case we know exactly what this circuit is and how it works because humans invented this.
But that is not the kind of circuit that just naturally emerges on its own.
This is specifically crafted for a specific purpose.
These other three images here highlight different circuits that we can talk about in another complex
system, which is the brain.
So this one here depicts a neuron.
So the black lines here, all these thin black lines here.
This depicts a tracing of a single brain cell.
The soma or the body is down here.
And all of these little ramifications are lots of dendrites that form connections to other neurons around
the basal area.
And then there's this main dendritic branch coming up here, connecting to yet more neurons at the apical
sites.
Now, the thing is that even within a single brain cell, there are subcomponents of the cell that form
their own mini circuits, and they can implement their own individual computations such as logical operations,
correlation, detection, filtering, and amplification.
In other words, we can talk about circuits in the brain at a subcellular level.
And then we have this higher level of anatomical organization here where each of these, like gooey
little triangles now depicts a neuron.
So these are the cell bodies.
And now we can talk about how neural circuits form comprising a few dozen or maybe a few hundred neurons
that are collectively implementing one kind of computation.
And there's an even higher level where we can talk about interactions between different brain regions
as forming a circuit for some high level cognitive or behavioral process.
And now we are talking about circuits that include millions or billions of neurons.
Of course, there is a theme that ties all of these levels of description together, which is that the
individual components of a system work together towards some common computational goal.
But my point here is that there's no real precise anatomical definition or way of confidently measuring
the boundaries of an anatomical circuit in the brain.
That is true for nervous systems, and it's true for really any complex system.
And how about in deep learning models?
Now what you see here, this diagram, this is not an LM architecture but just a more general multilayer
feed forward model.
So what would a circuit look like that is embedded inside this network?
Perhaps these four units here are all working together.
Maybe they're all strongly correlated, and their combined output is crucial for some kind of feature
detection in the data.
And maybe this is a little circuit with only two units over here.
Or maybe all six of these units form a circuit that spans multiple layers.
And because the weights and the activations are continuous numbers in these deep learning models, it's
just never going to be the case that we can identify circuits simply by looking at what neurons are
active at the same time and which ones aren't.
And that's because unless you have an extremely robust L1 regularizer or you're using dropout during
learning, then every neuron in the entire network has some non-zero activation.
And even if it has a negative activation that gets shunted by ReLU non-linearity, there still won't
be any neurons that have zero input.
Here you see another diagram of what a circuit in a language model might look like, at least conceptually.
So this shows that circuits are not necessarily fixed in the model.
They can evolve over time as new tokens are processed and more information is aggregated.
Conceptually, this is a beautiful idea that circuits are not fixed but instead are fluid over time.
But that makes for extremely difficult and nuanced data approaches to actually identify and characterize
those circuits, and also confirming the statistical robustness of the existence of those circuits in
large data sets.
So it just becomes really tricky to make sure that you're not just identifying some weird quirk that
happens to emerge in one particular text sequence.
So yeah, all of this stuff is very tricky for multiple reasons.
Here I have a very loose definition of a circuit in a deep learning network.
This is an operational definition in the sense that it's like a guiding principle for thinking about
analysis methods that I will introduce you to in this section.
Please do not interpret this statement to Restrictively.
This is not meant to be a formal scientific definition.
Basically, the analysis that I will introduce you to in this section are focused on using statistical
techniques to identify neurons or dimensions that behave in similar ways.
I hope I didn't come across as being too negative or pessimistic about identifying circuits in complex
systems like LMS.
This kind of research is very difficult, but I think it's one of the most exciting and promising avenues
of interpretability in complex systems.